---
title: "New_app_socsci"
date: 2024-06-27T12:19:03+02:00
draft: true
toc: false
images:
tags:
  - untagged
---

# A new interdisciplinary approach to the study of social sciences | Introduction

## Hard, Social, Sciences

In the study of phenomena it's common to look for reductionist perspectives. In
the context of social sciences, such vectors of analysis were especially loved
by positivist and neo-positivist thinkers, who always looked to "harden"
sociology, economics, political sciences and their many branches into the mold
of more rigorous disciplines, such as physics and chemistry.

As is often the case in the history of social sciences, this approach fell
partly flat, as it tried to squeeze the proverbial square peg in a round hole:
as complicated physics or chemistry may be, they enjoy a much more clearly
visible deterministic flavour than the social sciences. An assumption can be
made -and indeed is made- that an experiment can be repeated and that similar
results can be expected from each repetition, assuming minimal variation in the
starting conditions, which can be partially -dare I say mostly- controlled.

On this last point -control- social sciences have their biggest weakness.
Because in observing a person we see a unique individual, and not "a specimen of
human", we can't rightly make perfectly accurate inferences from single
instances of experiments, and because people are different both from each other
and from themselves (across time), we can't properly replicate _the same_
experiment more than once without incurring in some degree of inaccuracy

## Positivist Approach

Obviously correct sampling techniques can minimise systemic biases, and so we
can assume that for large enough sample sizes we will obtain results we can
rightly make inferences from. However, while doing so, and thus diving deep into
the positivist approach to the social sciences, we lose part of the connection
with the casual relationship we are trying to study in the first place. We can
observe statistically significant correlations and try to guess the relationship
between the variables the change of which we observed, but little more.

## Interpretative Approach

On the other side of the spectrum, we see the interpretative paradigm of
sociology. A more personal branch of study based on the concepts of Verstehen
and typology. If positivism, especially if it devolves into variable-sociology,
is akin to fitting a square peg into the proverbial round hole, Interpretative
sociology often faces of the risk of trying to make a needle fit into it; of
course, it passes without a hitch, but there's very little potential for
inference to be made out of it.

## Current-day Practice

While the interpretative approach is far more accurate in describing the exact
phenomenon it's studying (it's _internal validity_ is very high), the positivist
approach is great at making broad inference, but rarely neatly fits any real
situation (it's _external validity_ is very high).

This brought modern-day researchers to adopt a hybrid approach, using a more
interpretative paradigm to conduct exploratory research, and then to use its
findings to try to construct valid operationalizations of social variables, to
try to conduct broader research to make inferences about how society at large
works.

It's worthy of note that this debate isn't only present in the social sciences.
More individualised approaches to research are present in other fields, like
medicine, where recently some Eastern traditional techniques (such as
meditation) are being incorporated in western systems as randomised control
trials (RCTs) started to show their effectiveness. In this case, the influx may
(and has) lead some to reconsider the validity of heuristics, even in a "harder"
science, such as medicine (which, while it isn't physics, is certainly
considered more rigorous than the social sciences).

## The Value of Heuristics

While "heuristics" is often negatively charged, especially in scientific fields,
I personally find it undeniable that it's ubiquitous in any field that isn't
strictly reductionist (meaning most fields). While in some fields (such as
physics) it may be limited, in other fields, such as the Social Sciences, I
would argue that it's abundant. This is the case because of the dominance of the
positivist paradigm within social sciences. It's often easy in reading
economics, sociology, or political science papers to lose track of the fact that
humans are being talked about, and not puppets in a perfect model. It's true
that some fields (such as behavioural economics) are trying to avoid falling
into variable-sociology, but they're still relatively new and not the norm.

Lets quickly establish what I'll be meaning by "heuristics" specifically:

> A heuristic is the pragmatic abstraction of a process that attempts to explain
> its effects, but does not provide a clear explanation for the underpinning
> causal relationships that explain it

Seen in this lens, we can imagine a "broad", or "high-level" heuristic, or a
"focused", or "low-level" heuristic. Fields that are more reductionist minimise
the scope (or level) or their heuristics to almost make them disappear, while
newer, "softer" sciences still rely on broad, high-level heuristics.

Heuristics and also be simply "bad" or "good". An example of good heuristic is
the ancient Greek understanding that a balanced diet, in balancing the _humors_
of the body, would make one healthier. An example of a bad one would be that
blood lettings, in balancing the _humors_ of the body would heal one from
sickness.

In the present day, we very much rely on heuristics when predicting economic
effects using macroeconomic models, even if grounded in microeconomic
principles. We rely on heuristics when making prediction about the social effect
of policy. We rely on heuristics when making any prediction using a model of
which we don't fully understand the casual grounding of the effects.

To pose an example, we broadly know that inflation can be tackled with a rise in
the interest rates, but this knowledge is more akin to the ancient Indian notion
that certain diets would tackle the symptoms of diabetes, than to the knowledge
that insulin can restore the natural absorption of sugars. We're not acting at
random, and our actions often have positive consequences, but when our heuristic
fails, we may cause more damage than good.

For example, lets take austerity policy. According to the models we had in 2008,
1929, and every time it was applied, it was supposed to work, and help us out of
the economic crisis we were precipitating into. However, as it later became
apparent, that was not the case. We can see similar mistakes in other heuristic
systems, such as Ayurveda (there are sub-practices within Ayurveda that
prescribe toxic doses of lead).

However, we must be careful not to throw out the baby with the bath water: just
as _some_ aspects of Ayurvedic medicine can and are incorporated into western
medicine through careful analysis, the same could potentially be done with our
heuristic systems in the Social Sciences.

## Solutions

This is where we run into the issue I presented at the beginning: it's much,
much harder to conduct rigorous experimentation in the Social Sciences due to
the fact that we're studying an ever-changing, extremely complex system made of
the interactions of ever-changing, extremely complex individuals. In this
series, I try to explore different options

There's already branches of social sciences tackling this issue, such as
Behavioural economics, which tries to incorporate more micro-level elements into
the study of economics to account for the quirks of human beings as individuals,
rather than considering them rational actors. This is trying to move away from
the heuristic, and push it to a lower level, where the detail we lose from
adopting it is lower.

Another very interesting approach is the prospect of using specialised Large
Machine-Learning Models. This has generally been unfeasible, but it's very much
a possibility, seeing the current tooling. I personally believe that an approach
utilising Machine Learning, almost by definition a "heuristics machine", has
enormous potential to expand the field into a more well-rounded science, better
incorporating its micro and macro-level analysis by either:

- leaning into the heuristics and utilising a large amount of data to train very
  accurate models, or
- utilising specialised models to analyse broad populations at a depth generally
  only possible for case studies.

It's important to note that Machine Learning Models are pretty much black-boxes,
so if the aim it to reduce the level of heuristics we're utilising, the second
option is probably preferable, although less straight-forward than the first.
